# Teaching Statement

## Quan Nguyen

My teaching philosophy is drawn on my interdisciplinary research in learning analytics, which uses statistical and computational techniques to analyze learning behaviors, and years of teaching experience in introductory statistics for social science students (e.g., economics, psychology, education), and most recently, in the online Master of Applied Data Science (MADS) at Michigan. The cornerstones of my teaching are well-scaffolded learning materials, accompanied by relevant real-world examples and accessible resources to support student's self-regulated learning.  

The field of data science is broad and diverse, as reflected its students who come from a wide range of academic backgrounds, technical skills, and working experience. To meet the needs of our diverse students, I put a strong emphasis on understanding and application over mathematical formalization. This means avoiding abusing Greek symbols in the lectures, and focusing instead on real-world examples that directly link the course content to the application in their own discipline (e.g. economics, psychology, education). For example, when explaining the concepts of hypothesis testing to econ students, I use examples related to product A/B testing while for psychology students, I use examples related to psychological interventions. This customized approach ensures students grasp of “why” of data science before the “how”. The result was an increase in students’ engagement with the course content and learning discussion, sharpening their critical thinking when dealing with statistical questions. 

Second, I focus on developing a coherent and well-structured curriculum that build upon students’ prior knowledge. For example, when designing the course assignments for SIADS 680 – Learning Analytics in the MADS program, I adopted a case study approach in which students are tasked with the job of a data scientist at a university. In week 1, students were tasked with basic exploratory data analysis to answers questions related to enrollment trends and determine important metrics of student engagement. In week 2, students were asked to build a prediction model of student success based on the students’ demographic, academic records and click-stream data from LMS systems. In week 3, students were asked to investigate the algorithmic biases of their predictive models across ethnic and gender groups. In week 4, students were tasked to develop an interactive dashboard that helps university administrators and instructors extract relevant insights to improve teaching and learning practices. In all of these assignments, students work with the same dataset and use results from the previous assignments to inform their subsequent work.      

Another important aspect of my teaching approach is to help students become life-long leaners by developing their self-study skills, which are essential to a data scientist. This could take the forms of making my course materials accessible to students after class. For instance, I created a series of YouTube tutorials that recap the key statistical concepts and walk-through the steps of how to perform the data analysis while thinking aloud. These bite-sized, on-demand tutorials allowed students to learn at their own pace and choose to focus on areas that are more challenging for them. My teaching approach has been well received by students, as evidenced by written feedback and evaluation scores (i.e. overall score 4.3/5.0). When asked to choose the highlights of a semester with 3 courses, 80% of the responses mentioned statistics. Some highlights of the written feedback mentioned "the integration of the subjects, the hands-on practical's, recorded statistics lectures", that “the statistics lessons were fun and different from all the other lessons", and the video tutorials being “extremely helpful”.

Last but not least, I think it is essential to be aware of the existing stereotype threats that exist in STEM and data science and actively address them in our teaching practices. This could take the forms of inviting guest lecturers from underrepresented groups (e.g., women, ethnic minorities, data scientists who come from a non-traditional backgrounds), using inclusive and diverse worked examples when designing our curriculum, and creating opportunities for students to work and interact with peers from diverse backgrounds. 
